The Gaussian unequal-variance model of signal detection (UVSDT) has proven to provide a good mathematical description of recognition memory data. When it was initially introduced, it was just that: a mathematical formulation that described real-world data. Since then, as it gained in popularity, assumptions made by the model to improve fit and prediction, have been taken to be of theoretical importance. Papers have been written to show that the assumption of unequal variance in particular is a latent varaible / psychological process that is captured by the model and can be tested empirically.

We suggest here that the UVSDT model is only one parameterization of the signal detection model of recognition memory, with alternate parameterizations providing competitive fits and predictions to recognition memory data. This means that UVSDT is only a convenient implementation, not theoretical gospel.

We show that two alternative models (GumbelEVSDT, a combination of ExGaussian and Gaussian EVSDT) perform similarly well.

1. We fit all three models to data by Spanton & Berry (2021, preprint): data collected to test the unequal variance assumption of the UVSDT model. UVSDT and ExGauss model, at the same number of free parameters, provide roughly equivalent fits to the data. While the fit of the Gumbel model (by G2 or Deviance) is worse than that of the other two models, it has one less free parameter. Taking that into account, it outperforms both ExGauss and Gumbel.

2. Spanton & Berry note the correlation of dprime and sigma in the fits of the UVSDT to their data. We show that Gumbel and ExGauss-Gaussian can mimic this correlation even when sigma of the old-items distribution is euivalent to sigma in the new-items distribution

3. We show in mimicry analysis that both ExGaussian and Gumbel can mimic the UVSDT model. While the ExGaussian model can account for a range of Gumbel data, the Gumbel model struggles to account for ExGaussian data when the exponential component (resulting in a skew of the old-items distributio opposite to the one captured by the Gumbel model) is relatively small and the ExGaussian-Gaussian reduces to a Gaussian EVSDT model. As the exponential component increases, Gumbel results in misfits of the data. 

Regardelss: both are viable alternatives to the Gaussian UVSDT